[SYCL] Support make_buffer for the Level Zero backend (#5229)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/extensions/LevelZeroBackend/LevelZeroBackend.md

}
```
</td>
</tr><tr>
<td>buffer</td>
<td>

``` C++
void *
```
</td>
<td>

``` C++
struct {
  void *NativeHandle;
  ext::oneapi::level_zero::ownership Ownership{
      ext::oneapi::level_zero::ownership::transfer};
}
```
</td>
</tr>
</table>

> 

Reviewer: Actually, I wonder if `get_native()` should be supported for `buffer`.  Suppose an application creates a SYCL buffer and then immediately calls `get_native()` on it.  Will the buffer have any native representation yet, or do we lazily create the Level Zero allocation only once an accessor is created from the buffer?

> 

Author: These are good questions. If it is ok I would like to handle get_native() for L0 interop buffer separately on top of PR which adds get_native for OpenCL interoperability buffer: https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/5881

transfer the ownership to the SYCL runtime. See section 4.4 for details. If
the behavior is "transfer" then the runtime is going to destroy the input
Level-Zero kernel</td>
</tr><tr>
<td>

``` C++
template <backend Backend, typename T, int Dimensions = 1,
          typename AllocatorT = buffer_allocator>
typename std::enable_if<Backend == backend::ext_oneapi_level_zero,

>                         buffer<T, Dimensions, AllocatorT>>::type

Reviewer: Kind of a nit, but the other entries in this table do not have an `enable_if`.  It would be better to remove this and match the existing style.

Author: Fixed.

make_buffer(
    const backend_input_t<backend::ext_oneapi_level_zero,

>                           buffer<T, Dimensions, AllocatorT>> &BackendObject,

Reviewer: Also a nit, but the other entries do not name the `BackendObject` parameter.  Either remove the name here, or add it also to the other entries.

Author: Fixed.

    const context &TargetContext, event AvailableEvent = {})
```

> </td>

Reviewer: The Level Zero backend interop extension is considered "supported" now, so we need to be more careful about changes that add new APIs.  This new API should have a matching change to the feature-test macro (`SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_BACKEND_LEVEL_ZERO `) that is described in the Introduction section.  Specifically:

* Add a new row to the table in the Introduction section for version 2 of this macro.  The new row should state that support was added for the `make_buffer()` API.

* The description of `make_buffer()` should clearly state that it is available starting with revision 2 of this specification.

Author: Thank you, fixed.

> <td>Constructs a SYCL buffer instance from a Level-Zero memory allocation <code>void *</code>. 

Reviewer: There are three ways to allocate memory from Level Zero:

* `zeMemAllocShared`
* `zeMemAllocDevice`
* `zeMemAllocHost`

Do we support all three of those cases?  Even if we do support all three, I'd like to see that called out explicitly in the spec.  Maybe something like:

> Construct a SYCL buffer instance from a pointer to a Level Zero memory buffer.  The pointer must be the value returned from a previous call to `zeMemAllocShared()`, `zeMemAllocDevice()`, or `zeMemAllocHost()`.

Note that supporting all three cases would likely require some special handling in the runtime.  For example, a buffer created from `zeMemAllocDevice` would need some logic to copy the memory back to the host in case the application created a `host_accessor` to it.

There should be some description of the "buffer synchronization rules" for a buffer that is created with this interop API.  See [Section 4.7.2.3 "Buffer synchronization rules"](https://www.khronos.org/registry/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html#sec:buf-sync-rules) of the core SYCL spec.  One option is to say something like this:

> A SYCL buffer that is constructed with this interop API uses the Level Zero memory buffer for its full lifetime, and the contents of the Level Zero memory buffer are unspecified for the lifetime of the SYCL buffer.  If the application modifies the contents of that Level Zero memory buffer during the lifetime of the SYCL buffer, the behavior is undefined.  The initial contents of the SYCL buffer will be the initial contents of the Level Zero memory buffer at the time of the SYCL buffer's construction.
>
> The behavior of the SYCL buffer destructor depends on the `Ownership` flag.  As with other SYCL buffers, this behavior is triggered only when the last reference count to the buffer is dropped, as described in the core SYCL specification section 4.7.2.3, "Buffer synchronization rules".
>
> * If the ownership is `keep` (i.e. the application retains ownership of the Level Zero memory buffer), then the SYCL buffer destructor blocks until all work in queues on the buffer have completed.  The buffer's contents are written to the Level Zero memory buffer by the time the destructor completes.
>
> * If the ownership is `transfer` (i.e. the SYCL runtime has ownership of the Level Zero memory buffer), then the SYCL buffer destructor does not block even if work on the buffer has not completed.  The SYCL runtime frees the Level Zero memory buffer asynchronously when it is no longer in use in queues.

Here are some other things to consider about the behavior:

* It is legal to create an accessor to a buffer that allows access from any device.  For example, a SYCL buffer could be created from Level Zero memory allocated on device *D1*, but it is still legal to create an accessor for that buffer from some other device *D2*.  (The SYCL runtime is responsible for copying memory in this case if necessary.)  You do not list any restriction about this, so I presume it is expected to work even for buffers created with this interop API, correct?

* Are there any issues with creating a sub-buffer from a buffer that is created with this interop API?

Author: Due to lack of support in the L0 plugin it is currently not allowed to access buffer from other devices if it is created with zeMemAllocDevice or zeMemAllocShared, I've specified this restriction in the tracker.
It is allowed for buffers created from zeMemAllocHost pointer.

There are no issues with creating sub-buffers. I will update the test with some sub-buffer case.

Reviewer: Thanks for the updates.

Since you are talking about tests, it would be good to test this case:

* The buffer is created from memory allocated with `zeMemAllocDevice()`.
* The application creates a `host_accessor` to access the contents of the buffer.

This is an interesting case because the runtime needs to copy the contents of the buffer from the device to the host.

Author: Yes, I've added such test to the https://github.com/intel/llvm-test-suite/pull/708

The <code>Context</code> argument must be a valid SYCL context encapsulating a Level-Zero context, and the Level-Zero memory must be allocated on the same context. 

> The <code>AvailableEvent</code> argument must be a valid SYCL event, the instance of the SYCL buffer class template being constructed must wait for the SYCL event parameter, signaled event means that the memory native handle is ready to be used.

Reviewer: The core SYCL spec lists two overloads of `make_buffer`, one that takes the event and one that does not.  I think we should follow suit and create two overloads also.

Author: Thanks, fixed.

> The <code>Size</code> input structure member specifies a size of a Level-Zero memory allocation in bytes.

Reviewer 2: Why do we have to know the size? Is it only to report it with piMemGetInfo? Maybe we should just report "unknown" value for interop buffer, since the size should be known to the application already

Author: To construct sycl::buffer object we need to know the size, sycl::buffer can't be constructed with unknown size. For OpenCL size can be queried from cl_mem using clMemGetInfo but for Level Zero native memory handle is just a raw pointer void*. The only option I see is to provide the size.

Reviewer 2: But why do you think size is required at construction? What happens if you let the size to be some fake value decoded as unknown?

Reviewer: I have a separate question about the size.  Must the size be the same value that was passed to `zeMemAllocShared` / `zeMemAllocDevice` / `zeMemAllocHost`, or is it legal to pass a smaller value?  One could imagine that it might be useful to allow a smaller value in some cases.  Either way, the spec should clarify what the requirement is.

Author: > But why do you think size is required at construction? What happens if you let the size to be some fake value decoded as unknown?
Problem is that if size is unknown then we will not be able to create a host accessor to the buffer if someone provided a pointer created with zeMemAllocDevice. In this case we need to allocate a host buffer and copy device allocation to this host buffer. And we need to know the size of a buffer to allocate a host buffer.

We can disallow zeMemAllocDevice pointers to be provided to make_buffer or disallow creation of the host buffers but I'm not sure if it is an option.

Also get_size, get_range methods of the buffer will return some unknown value.

Author: It looks like we can query size of the allocation: https://spec.oneapi.io/level-zero/latest/core/api.html?highlight=getmemory#zememgetaddressrange
I will check if it works and will drop the Size from make_buffer.

Author: Unfortunately, zeMemGetAddressRange doesn't return user-provided buffer size but some internal value. That's why I need to keep Size parameter to be able to handle buffers allocated on device which need shadow host allocation in case of copy back.

> I have a separate question about the size.  Must the size be the same value that was passed to `zeMemAllocShared` / `zeMemAllocDevice` / `zeMemAllocHost`, or is it legal to pass a smaller value?  One could imagine that it might be useful to allow a smaller value in some cases.  Either way, the spec should clarify what the requirement is.
@gmlueck I have specified in the doc that size must have the same value that was passed to  `zeMemAllocShared` / `zeMemAllocDevice` / `zeMemAllocHost`. If smaller buffer is needed then user should create sub-buffer.

> The <code>Ownership</code> input structure member specifies if the SYCL runtime should take ownership of the passed native handle. The default behavior is to transfer the ownership to the SYCL runtime. See section 4.4 for details. If the behavior is "transfer" then the runtime is going to destroy the input Level-Zero memory allocation</td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The <code>Ownership</code> input structure member specifies if the SYCL runtime should take ownership of the passed native handle. The default behavior is to transfer the ownership to the SYCL runtime. See section 4.4 for details. If the behavior is "transfer" then the runtime is going to free the input Level-Zero memory buffer</td>

```

I think it is clearer to say that the runtime "frees" the buffer, rather than "destroys" it.  This matches wording in the Level Zero spec (e.g. `zeMemFree` says "Frees allocated host memory, device memory, or shared memory on the context").

Author: Thanks, fixed.

transfer the ownership to the SYCL runtime. See section 4.4 for details. If
the behavior is "transfer" then the runtime is going to destroy the input
Level-Zero kernel</td>
</tr><tr>
<td>

``` C++
make_buffer(
    const backend_input_t<backend::ext_oneapi_level_zero,
                          buffer<T, Dimensions, AllocatorT>> &,
    const context &Context)
```
</td>
<td>This API is available starting with revision 2 of this specification.

> Construct a SYCL buffer instance from a pointer to a Level Zero memory buffer. The pointer must be the value returned from a previous call to <code>zeMemAllocShared()</code>, <code>zeMemAllocDevice()</code>, or <code>zeMemAllocHost()</code>. If pointer is the value returned from <code>zeMemAllocDevice()</code> or <code>zeMemAllocShared()</code> then SYCL context <code>Context</code> must be associated with a single device.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Construct a SYCL buffer instance from a pointer to a Level Zero memory buffer. The pointer must be the value returned from a previous call to <code>zeMemAllocShared()</code>, <code>zeMemAllocDevice()</code>, or <code>zeMemAllocHost()</code>. If pointer is the value returned from <code>zeMemAllocDevice()</code> or <code>zeMemAllocShared()</code> then SYCL context <code>Context</code> must be associated with a single device, matching the device used at the prior allocation.

```

Author: Fixed.

The <code>Context</code> argument must be a valid SYCL context encapsulating a Level-Zero context, and the Level-Zero memory must be allocated on the same context. Created SYCL buffer can accessed on another contexts.
The <code>Ownership</code> input structure member specifies if the SYCL runtime should take ownership of the passed native handle. The default behavior is to transfer the ownership to the SYCL runtime. See section 4.4 for details. If the behavior is "transfer" then the runtime is going to free the input Level-Zero memory buffer. 
Synchronization rules for a buffer that is created with this API are described in Section 4.5</td>
</tr><tr>
<td>

``` C++
make_buffer(
    const backend_input_t<backend::ext_oneapi_level_zero,
                          buffer<T, Dimensions, AllocatorT>> &,

>     const context &Context, event AvailableEvent)

Reviewer 2: But there is no SYCL-2020 "make_buffer" that takes an "event, is there?

Reviewer: There is.  See this table: https://www.khronos.org/registry/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html#sec:backend-interoperability-make

Reviewer 2: OK, thanks

```
</td>
<td>This API is available starting with revision 2 of this specification.

Construct a SYCL buffer instance from a pointer to a Level Zero memory buffer. Please refer to <code>make_buffer</code>
description above for semantics and restrictions.

> The additional <code>AvailableEvent</code> argument must be a valid SYCL event, the instance of the SYCL buffer class template being constructed must wait for the SYCL event parameter, signaled event means that the memory native handle is ready to be used.

Reviewer 2: I don't see why we need this "event". If memory is not ready then the interop user is free to wait for whatever is needed before calling to standard (no event) "make_buffer".

transfer the ownership to the SYCL runtime. See section 4.4 for details. If
the behavior is "transfer" then the runtime is going to destroy the input
Level-Zero kernel</td>
</tr><tr>
<td>

``` C++
make_buffer(
    const backend_input_t<backend::ext_oneapi_level_zero,
                          buffer<T, Dimensions, AllocatorT>> &,
    const context &Context)
```
</td>
<td>This API is available starting with revision 2 of this specification.

Construct a SYCL buffer instance from a pointer to a Level Zero memory buffer. The pointer must be the value returned from a previous call to <code>zeMemAllocShared()</code>, <code>zeMemAllocDevice()</code>, or <code>zeMemAllocHost()</code>. If pointer is the value returned from <code>zeMemAllocDevice()</code> or <code>zeMemAllocShared()</code> then SYCL context <code>Context</code> must be associated with a single device.
The <code>Context</code> argument must be a valid SYCL context encapsulating a Level-Zero context, and the Level-Zero memory must be allocated on the same context. Created SYCL buffer is

> associated only with the single SYCL context <code>Context</code>, the buffer can't be accessed on another contexts.

Author: Actually, I've realized that we don't need this limitation at all. 

Initially I made this restriction because memory buffer can be used only in the context where it is created: 
https://spec.oneapi.io/level-zero/latest/core/api.html?highlight=zememallocdevice#zememallocdevice

> The application must only use the memory allocation for the context and device, or its sub-devices, which was provided during allocation.

But it turns out SYCL RT handles the case when SYCL buffer is used in different context (opencl buffer is also isolated in the context).  So, if buffer encapsulates allocation on ctx1 and this buffer is accessed on ctx2 then SYCL RT creates a new allocation on ctx2 and copies contents of the first allocation to the second allocation through host (i.e. 2 copy operations - device to host and host to device)

But there is one problem. After buffer destruction data is not automatically copied back to original allocation on ctx1 (to follow keep semantics that you described). Currently contents of the buffer can be accessed through host accessor (or probably somehow artificially by submitting buffer to the original context with empty kernel).

Copy back logic requires additional changes in buffer and/or scheduler. I am not sure if we can somehow describe this as a limitation and implement later.

> associated only with the single SYCL context <code>Context</code>, the buffer can't be accessed on another contexts.

Reviewer: I think we should avoid documenting a feature that we don't implement.  This will just lead to customer confusion and bug reports.  Here are a couple of options:

1. Add the support now to copy back the data to the original buffer for this case.

2. Support only the `transfer` case in this version of the extension.  This is the default behavior anyway, so presumably we think this is the common case.  We could retain the `Ownership` field, but `make_buffer` would throw an exception if the user passes `keep`.  Since the issue about copying data back only exists in the "keep" case, we don't need to implement that now.  We have the option in the future to add support for `keep` and implement the copy-back behavior in the future.

> associated only with the single SYCL context <code>Context</code>, the buffer can't be accessed on another contexts.

Reviewer 2: But "keep" is only "broken" on case of access to the buffer from multiple contexts, which would be a very rare case, I believe. I'd vote for documenting the "keep" and make it work while in the same context, and create a bug about missing copy for multiple contexts.

> associated only with the single SYCL context <code>Context</code>, the buffer can't be accessed on another contexts.

Reviewer: If we think the "keep" case is important, we should implement it for all cases.  How hard is it to do the write-back?

> associated only with the single SYCL context <code>Context</code>, the buffer can't be accessed on another contexts.

Author: Implemented write-back and added test to https://github.com/intel/llvm-test-suite/pull/708

### 4.5 Interoperability buffer synchronization rules

A SYCL buffer that is constructed with this interop API uses the Level Zero memory buffer for its full lifetime, and the contents of the Level Zero memory buffer are unspecified for the lifetime of the SYCL buffer. If the application modifies the contents of that Level Zero memory buffer during the lifetime of the SYCL buffer, the behavior is undefined. The initial contents of the SYCL buffer will be the initial contents of the Level Zero memory buffer at the time of the SYCL buffer's construction.

The behavior of the SYCL buffer destructor depends on the Ownership flag. As with other SYCL buffers, this behavior is triggered only when the last reference count to the buffer is dropped, as described in the core SYCL specification section 4.7.2.3, "Buffer synchronization rules".

* If the ownership is keep (i.e. the application retains ownership of the Level Zero memory buffer), then the SYCL buffer destructor blocks until all work in queues on the buffer have completed. The buffer's contents are written to the Level Zero memory buffer by the time the destructor completes.

> * If the ownership is transfer (i.e. the SYCL runtime has ownership of the Level Zero memory buffer), then the SYCL buffer destructor blocks until all work in queues on the buffer have completed. The SYCL runtime frees the Level Zero memory buffer asynchronously when it is no longer in use in queues.

Author: I see, indeed spec says that destructor is not necessarily blocking:

> A buffer can be constructed with just a size and using the default buffer allocator. ... The destructor for this type of buffer does not need to block, even if work on the buffer has not completed. 

But problem is that currently implementation is blocking in this case, even if I do set_write_back(false) explicitly. Implementation of buffer destructor is blocking in all cases now.

I propose to use the same wording for interop buffer - "does not need to block" instead of "doesn't block". And in the future if non-blocking version of the buffer will be implemented we will use it for "transfer" semantics as well.

> * If the ownership is transfer (i.e. the SYCL runtime has ownership of the Level Zero memory buffer), then the SYCL buffer destructor blocks until all work in queues on the buffer have completed. The SYCL runtime frees the Level Zero memory buffer asynchronously when it is no longer in use in queues.

Reviewer: > I propose to use the same wording for interop buffer - "does not need to block" instead of "doesn't block".

Given that we use this wording also in the core spec, I do not object to using it in this extension spec.
